#CodeBook

The purpose of this codebook is to describe the variables in the tidy data set generated by running the file "run_analysis.R".


Background:
The original data was downloaded from https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip and it contains data from a Human Activity Recognition database built from the recordings of 30 subjects performing activities of daily living (ADL) while carrying a waist-mounted smartphone with embedded inertial sensors.
A description of the experiment can be found at: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones 	

Original Data Set Information:

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data.

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain.

Check the README.txt file for further details about this dataset.

Attribute Information:

For each record in the dataset it is provided:
- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope.
- A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables.
- Its activity label.
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment. 


Following is a description of the features in the original data set:

Feature Selection 
=================

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

* tBodyAcc-XYZ
* tGravityAcc-XYZ
* tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
* tBodyGyro-XYZ
* tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
* tBodyAccMag
* tGravityAccMag
* tBodyAccJerkMag
* tBodyGyroMag
* tBodyGyroJerkMag
* fBodyAcc-XYZ
* fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
* fBodyGyro-XYZ
* fBodyAccMag
* fBodyAccJerkMag
* fBodyGyroMag
* fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

* mean(): Mean value
* std(): Standard deviation
* mad(): Median absolute deviation 
* max(): Largest value in array
* min(): Smallest value in array
* sma(): Signal magnitude area
* energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
* iqr(): Interquartile range 
* entropy(): Signal entropy
* arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
* correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
* maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
* meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
* skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
* kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
* bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
* angle(): Angle between to vectors.

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

* gravityMean
* tBodyAccMean
* tBodyAccJerkMean
* tBodyGyroMean
* tBodyGyroJerkMean

The complete list of variables of each feature vector is available in 'features.txt'


Processing and description of the Tidy Data Set

Only the values representing the mean and standard deviation were extracted and placed in the tidy dataset. There are 30 subjects and 6 activities, in the resulting tidy data set the mean and standard deviation measurements over a given subject/activity have been averaged. The resulting tidy data set has 180 lines.

Note that the variable names have been edited for clarity/readability.  The following style guidelines have been used:
1. parentheses have been removed
2. capitals have been removed
3. periods have been placed between words, while this is usually not desirable it was thought necessary for readability
4. words have been spelled out for readability:
	the prefixes "t" and "f" to denote time domain and frequency domain have been replaced with "time" and "freq"
 	"acc" has become "accleration"
 	"mag" has become "magnitude"


Here is a complete list of the variables in the tidy data set:
* subject.id
* activity
* time.body.acceleration.mean.x.average
* time.body.acceleration.mean.y.average
* time.body.acceleration.mean.z.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.mean.x.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.mean.y.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.mean.z.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.mean.x.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.mean.y.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.mean.z.average
* time.body.gyro.mean.x.average
* time.body.gyro.mean.y.average
* time.body.gyro.mean.z.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.mean.x.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.mean.y.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.mean.z.average
* time.body.acceleration.magnitude.mean.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.magnitude.mean.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.magnitude.mean.average
* time.body.gyro.magnitude.mean.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.magnitude.mean.average
* freq.body.acceleration.mean.x.average
* freq.body.acceleration.mean.y.average
* freq.body.acceleration.mean.z.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.mean.x.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.mean.y.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.mean.z.average
* freq.body.gyro.mean.x.average
* freq.body.gyro.mean.y.average
* freq.body.gyro.mean.z.average
* freq.body.acceleration.magnitude.mean.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.magnitude.mean.average
* freq.body.gyro.magnitude.mean.average
* freq.body.gyro.jerk.magnitude.mean.average
* time.body.acceleration.std.x.average
* time.body.acceleration.std.y.average
* time.body.acceleration.std.z.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.std.x.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.std.y.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.std.z.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.std.x.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.std.y.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.std.z.average
* time.body.gyro.std.x.average
* time.body.gyro.std.y.average
* time.body.gyro.std.z.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.std.x.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.std.y.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.std.z.average
* time.body.acceleration.magnitude.std.average
* time.gravity.acceleration.magnitude.std.average
* time.body.acceleration.jerk.magnitude.std.average
* time.body.gyro.magnitude.std.average
* time.body.gyro.jerk.magnitude.std.average
* freq.body.acceleration.std.x.average
* freq.body.acceleration.std.y.average
* freq.body.acceleration.std.z.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.std.x.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.std.y.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.std.z.average
* freq.body.gyro.std.x.average
* freq.body.gyro.std.y.average
* freq.body.gyro.std.z.average
* freq.body.acceleration.magnitude.std.average
* freq.body.acceleration.jerk.magnitude.std.average
* freq.body.gyro.magnitude.std.average
* freq.body.gyro.jerk.magnitude.std.average




